Death of a hero
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Remembering George Moore’s denunciation of prefaces, I felt that what I
wanted to say here could be best expressed in a letter to you. Although
you are a little older than I, you belong essentially to the same
generation—those who spent their childhood and adolescence struggling,
like young Samsons, in the toils of the Victorians; whose early manhood
coincided with the European War. A great number of the men of our
generation died prematurely. We are unlucky or lucky enough to remain.

I began this book almost immediately after the Armistice, in a little
Belgian cottage—my billet. I remember the landscape was buried deep
in snow, and that we had very little fuel. Then came demobilization,
and the effort of readjustment cost my manuscript its life. I threw it
aside, and never picked it up again. The attempt was premature. Then,
ten years later, almost day for day, I once more felt the impulse
return, and began this book. You, I know, will read it sympathetically
for many reasons. But I cannot expect the same favour from others.

This book is not the work of a professional novelist. It is,
apparently, not a novel at all. Certain conventions of form and method
in the novel have been erected, I gather, into immutable laws, and
are looked upon with quite superstitious reverence. They are entirely
disregarded here. To me the excuse for the novel is that one can do
any damn thing one pleases. I am told I have done things as terrible
as if you introduced asides and soliloquies into your plays, and came
on to the stage in the middle of a scene to take part in the action.
You know how much I should be interested if you did that—I am all for
disregarding artistic rules of thumb. I dislike standardized art as
much as standardized life. Whether I have been guilty of Expressionism
or Super-realism or not, I don’t know and don’t care. I knew what
I wanted to say, and said it. And I know I have not tried to be
“original.”

The technique of this book, if it can be said to have one, is that
which I evolved for myself in writing a longish modern poem (which
you liked) called “A Fool i’ th’ Forest.” Some people said that was
“jazz poetry”; so I suppose this is a jazz novel. You will see how
appropriate that is to the theme.

I believe you at least will be sympathetic to the implied or expressed
idealism of this book. Through a good many doubts and hesitations and
changes I have always preserved a certain idealism. I believe in men,
I believe in a certain fundamental integrity and comradeship, without
which society could not endure. How often that integrity is perverted,
how often that comradeship betrayed, there is no need to tell you.
I disbelieve in bunk and despotism, even in a dictatorship of the
intelligentsia. I think you and I are not wholly unacquainted with the
intelligentsia?

Some of the young, they who will “do the noble things that we forgot,”
think differently. According to them, bunk must be parried by
super-bunk. Sincerity is superannuated. It doesn’t matter what you have
to say; what matters is whether you can put it across successfully. And
the only hope is to forbid everybody to read except a few privileged
persons (chosen how and by whom?) who will autocratically tell the rest
of us what to do. Well, do we believe that? I answer on your behalf as
well as my own that we emphatically do not. Of course, these young men
may be Swiftean ironists.

But, as you will see, this book is really a threnody, a memorial
in its ineffective way to a generation which hoped much, strove
honestly, and suffered deeply. Others, of course, may see it all very
differently. Why should they not? I believe that all we claim is that
we try to say what appears to be the truth, and that we are not afraid
either to contradict ourselves or to retract an error.

This novel in print differs in some particulars from the same work in
manuscript. To my astonishment, my publishers informed me that certain
words, phrases, sentences, and even passages, are at present illegal in
the United States. I have recorded nothing which I have not observed
in human life, said nothing I do not believe to be true; and I had not
the slightest intention of appealing to anyone’s salacious instincts.
My theme was too seriously tragic for that. But I am bound to accept
the advice of those who know the Law concerning the published word. I
have therefore asked my publishers to delete everything they consider
objectionable, and to substitute asterisks for every word deleted. I
would rather have my book mutilated than say what I do not believe.


The casualty lists went on appearing for a long time after the
Armistice—last spasms of Europe’s severed arteries. Of course, nobody
much bothered to read the lists. Why should they? The living must
protect themselves from the dead, especially the intrusive dead. But
the twentieth century had lost its Spring with a vengeance. So a good
deal of forgetting had to be done.

Under the heading “Killed in Action,” one of these later lists
contained the words:

The small interest created by this item of news and the rapidity with
which he was forgotten would have surprised even George Winterbourne;
and he had that bottomless cynicism of the infantry subaltern which
veiled itself in imbecile cheerfulness, and thereby misled a good
many not very acute people. Winterbourne had rather hoped he would be
killed, and knew that his premature demise in the middle twenties would
be borne with easy stoicism by those who survived him. But his vanity
would have been a little shocked by what actually happened.

A life, they say, may be considered as a point of light which suddenly
appears from nowhere, out of the blue. The point describes a luminous
geometrical figure in space-time; and then just as suddenly disappears.
(Interesting to have seen the lights disappearing from Space-Time
during one of the big battles—Death dowses the glims.) Well, it
happens to us all; but our vanity is interested by the hope that the
rather tangled and not very luminous track we made will continue to
shine for a few people for a few years. I suppose Winterbourne’s name
does appear on some War Memorial, probably in the Chapel of his Public
School; and, of course, he’s got his neat ration of headstone in
France. But that’s about all. Nobody much minded that he was killed.
Unassertive people with no money have few friends; and Winterbourne
hadn’t counted much on his scanty flock, least of all on me. But I
know—because he told me himself—that he had rather relied on four
people to take some interest in him and his fate. They were his father
and mother, his wife and his mistress. If he had known what actually
occurred with these four at the news of his death I think he would
have been a little shocked, as well as heartily amused and perhaps
a bit relieved. It would have freed him from certain feelings of
responsibility.

Winterbourne’s father, whom I knew slightly, was an inadequate
sentimentalist. Mild, with an affectation of gentility, incompetent,
selfishly unselfish (i.e., always patting himself on the back for
“renouncing” something he was afraid to do or be or take), he had a
genius for messing up other people’s lives. The amount of irreparable
harm which can be done by a really “good” man is astounding. Ten
astute rogues do less. Old Winterbourne messed up his wife’s life by
being weak with her; messed up his children’s lives by being weak and
sentimentalish with them and by losing his money—the unforgivable sin
in a parent; messed up the lives of his friends and clients by honestly
losing their money for them; and messed up his own most completely.
That was the one thing he ever did with complete and satisfactory
thoroughness. The mess he got his life into would have baffled an army
of psychologists to unravel.

When I told Winterbourne what I thought of his father, he admitted
it was mostly true. But he rather liked the man, probably disarmed by
the mildness, and not sufficiently hard to his father’s soft selfish
sentimentality. Possibly old Winterbourne would have felt and have
acted differently in his reactions to George’s death, if circumstances
had been different. But he was so scared by the war, so unable to
adjust himself to a harsh intruding reality—he had spent his life
avoiding realities—that he took refuge in a drivelling religiosity.
He got to know some rather slimy Roman Catholics, and read the slimy
religious tracts they showered on him, and talked and sobbed to the
exceedingly slimy priest they found for him. So about the middle
of the war he was “received,” and found—let us hope—comfort in
much prayer and Mass-going and writing rules for Future Conduct and
rather suspecting he was like François de Sales and praying for the
beatification of the super-slimy Thérèse of Lisieux.

Old Winterbourne was in London, “doing war work,” when the news of
George’s death came. He would never have done anything so positive and
energetic if he had not been nagged and goaded into it by his wife.
She was animated less by motives of disinterested patriotism than by
exasperation with him for existing at all and for interrupting her
love affairs. Old Winterbourne always said with proud sad dignity that
his “religious convictions forbade” him to divorce her. Religious
convictions are such an easy excuse for being nasty. So she found a
war job for him in London, and put him into a position where it was
impossible for him to refuse.

The telegram from the War Office—“Regret to inform... killed in
action.... Their Majesties’ sympathy....”—went to the home address in
the country, and was opened by Mrs. Winterbourne. Such an excitement
for her, almost a pleasant change, for it was pretty dull in the
country just before the Armistice. She was sitting by the fire, yawning
over her twenty-second lover—the affair had lasted nearly a year—when
the servant brought the telegram. It was addressed to Mr. Winterbourne,
but, of course, she opened it; she had an idea that “one of _those_
women” was “after” her husband; who, however, was regrettably chaste,
from cowardice.

Mrs. Winterbourne liked drama in private life. She uttered a most
creditable shriek, clasped both hands to her rather soggy bosom,
and pretended to faint. The lover, one of those nice clean sporting
Englishmen with a minimum of intelligence and an infinite capacity for
being gulled by females, especially the clean English sort, clutched
her unwillingly and automatically but with quite an Ethel M. Dell
appearance of emotion, and exclaimed:

“Darling, what is it? Has _he_ insulted you again?”

Poor old Winterbourne was incapable of insulting any one, but it was a
convention always established between Mrs. Winterbourne and her lovers
that Winterbourne had “insulted” her, when his worst taunt had been to
pray earnestly for her conversion to the True Faith, along with the
rest of “poor misguided England.”

In low moaning tones, founded on the best tradition of sensational
fiction, Mrs. Winterbourne feebly ejaculated:

“Dead, dead, dead!”

“Who’s dead? Winterbourne?”

(Some apprehension perhaps in the attendant Sam Browne—he would have
to propose, of course, and might be accepted.)

“They’ve killed him, those vile, _filthy_ foreigners. My _baby_ son.”

Sam Browne, still mystified, read the telegram. He then stood to
attention, saluted (although not wearing a cap) and said solemnly:

“A clean sportin’ death, an _Englishman’s_ death.”

When Huns were killed it was neither clean nor sportin’, but served the
beggars—(“buggers,” among men)—right.

The tears Mrs. Winterbourne shed were not very natural, but they
did not take long to dry. Dramatically, she ran to the telephone.
Dramatically, she called to the local exchange:

“Trrrunks. (Sob.) Give me Kensington 1030. Mr. Winterbourne’s number,
you know. (Sob.) Our _darling_ son—Captain Winterbourne,—has been
killed by those (sob) beasts. (Sob. Pause.) Oh, thank you _so_ much,
Mr. Crump, I _knew_ you would feel for us in our trouble. (Sob. Sob.)
But the blow is so sudden. I _must_ speak to Mr. Winterbourne. Our
hearts are _breaking_ here. (Sobissimo.) Thank you. I’ll wait till you
ring me.”

Mrs. Winterbourne’s effort on the telephone to her husband was not
unworthy of her:

“Is that you, George? Yes, Isabel speaking. I have just had _rather_
bad news. No, about George. You must be prepared, darling. I fear he
is seriously ill. What? No. _George._ GEORGE. Can’t you hear? Yes,
that’s better. Now, listen, darling, you must prepare for a _great_
shock. George is seriously ill. Yes, _our_ George, our _baby_ son.
What? Wounded? No, not wounded, very _dangerously_ ill. No, darling,
there is little hope. (Sob.) Yes, darling, a telegram from the _King_
and _Queen_. Shall I read it? You are prepared for the shock (sob),
George, aren’t you? ‘Deeply regret... killed in action.... Their
Majesties’ sympathy....’ (Sob. Long pause.) Are you there, George?
Hullo, hullo? (Sob.) Hullo, hullo. HULLO. (Aside to Sam Browne.) He’s
rung off! How that man _insults_ me, how can I bear it in my sorrow?
After I had prepared him for the shock! (Sob. Sob.) But I have always
had to _fight_ for my children, while he squatted over his books—and
_prayed_.”

To Mrs. Winterbourne’s credit let it be said, she had very little
belief in the value of prayer in practical affairs. But then her real
objection to religion was founded upon her dislike for doing anything
she didn’t want to do, and a profound hatred for everything distantly
resembling thought.

At the fatal news Mr. Winterbourne had fallen upon his knees (not
forgetting, however, to ring off the harpy), ejaculating: “Lord Jesus,
receive his soul!” Mr. Winterbourne then prayed a good deal, for
George’s soul, for himself, for “my erring but beloved spouse,” for
his other children, “may they be spared and by Thy Mercy brought to
the True Faith,” for England (ditto), for his enemies, “though Thou
knowest, Dear Lord Jesus, the enmity was none of my seeking, sinner
though I be, mea culpa, mea culpa, mea maxima culpa, Ave Maria....”

Mr. Winterbourne remained on his knees for some time. But, as the hall
tiles hurt his knees, he went and knelt on a hassock at the prie-dieu
in his bedroom. On the top of this was an open Breviary in very
ecclesiastical binding with a florid ecclesiastical book-marker, all
lying on an ecclesiastical bit of embroidery, the “gift of a Catholic
sister in Christ.” Above, on a bracket, was a coloured B.V.M. from the
Place St. Sulpice, holding a nauseating Infant Jesus dangling a bloody
and sun-rayed Sacred Heart. Over this again was a large but rather
cheap-looking imitation bronze Crucifix, with a reproduction (coloured)
of Leonardo’s _Last Supper_ to the right, and another reproduction
(uncoloured) of Holman Hunt’s (heretical) _Light of the World_ to the
left. All of which gave Mr. Winterbourne the deepest spiritual comfort.

After dinner, of which he ate sparingly, thinking with dreary
satisfaction how grief destroys appetite, he went round to see his
confessor, Father Slack. He spent a pleasantly emotional evening. Mr.
Winterbourne cried a good deal, and they both prayed; Father Slack
said perhaps George had been influenced by his father’s prayers and
virtues and had made an act of contrition before he died, and Mr.
Winterbourne said that although George had not been “received” he had
“a true Catholic spirit” and had once read a sermon of Bossuet; and
Father Slack said he would pray for George’s soul, and Mr. Winterbourne
left £5 for Masses for the repose of George, which was generous (if
foolish), for he didn’t earn much.

And then Mr. Winterbourne used to pray ten minutes longer every night
and morning for George’s soul, but unfortunately he went and got
himself run over just by the Marble Arch as he was meditating on that
blessed martyr, Father Parsons, and that other more blessed martyr,
Father Garnet of Gunpowder fame. So, as the £5 was soon exhausted,
there was nobody to pray for George’s soul; and for all the Holy Roman
and Apostolic Church knows or cares, poor old George is in Hell, and
likely to remain there. But, after the last few years of his life,
George probably doesn’t find any difference.

So much for George’s father and George’s death. The “reactions” (as
they are called) of Mrs. Winterbourne were different. She found it
rather exciting and stimulating at first, especially erotically
stimulating. She was a woman who constantly dramatized herself and
her life. She was as avid of public consideration as an Italian
lieutenant, no matter what the quality of the praise. The only servants
who ever stayed more than a trial month with her were those who bowed
themselves to an abject discipline of adulation for Mrs. Winterbourne,
Mrs. Winterbourne’s doings and sayings and possessions and whims and
friends. Only, since Mrs. Winterbourne was exceedingly fickle and
quarrelsome, and was always changing friends into enemies and vowed
enemies into hollow friends, a more than diplomatic suppleness was
exacted of these mercenary retainers, who only stayed with her because
she gave them presents or raised their wages whenever the praise was
really gratifying.

Although a lady of “mature charms,” Mrs. Winterbourne loved to fancy
herself as a delicious young thing of seventeen, passionately beloved
by a sheik-like but nevertheless “clean” (not to say “straight”)
Englishman. She was a mistress of would-be revolutionary platitudes
about marriage and property (rather like the talk of an “enlightened”
parson) but, in fact, was as sordid, avaricious, conventional and
spiteful middle-middle class woman as you could dread to meet. Like
all her class, she toadied to her betters and bullied her inferiors.
But, with her conventionality, she was, of course, a hypocrite. In
her kittenish moods, which she cultivated with a strange lack of a
sense of congruity, she liked to throw out hints about “kicking over
the traces.” But, as a matter of fact, she never soared much above
tippling, financial dishonesty, squabbling, lying, betting, and affairs
with bounderish young men, whom only her romantic effrontery could have
dared describe as “clean and straight,” although there was no doubt
whatever about their being English, and indeed sportin’ in a more or
less bounderish way.

She had had so many of these clean straight young sheiks that even
poor Mr. Winterbourne got mixed up, and when he used to write dramatic
letters beginning: “Sir, you have robbed me of my wife’s affection like
a low hound—be it said in no unChristian spirit”—the letters were
always getting addressed to the penultimate or ante-penultimate sheik,
instead of the straight clean one of the moment. However, rendered
serious by the exhortations of the war press and still more by the ever
ripening maturity of her charms, Mrs. Winterbourne made an instinctive
and firm clutch at Sam Browne—so successfully that she clutched the
poor devil for the remainder of his abbreviated life. (She did the
abbreviating.) Sam Browne, of course, was almost too good to be true.
If I hadn’t seen him myself I should never have believed in him. He was
an animated—and not so very animated—stereotype. His knowledge of
life was rudimentary to the point of being quadruped, and intelligence
had been bestowed upon him with rigid parsimony. An adult Boy Scout, a
Public School fag in shining armour—the armour of obtuseness. He met
every situation in life with a formula, and no situation in life ever
reached him except in the shape imposed upon it by the appropriate
and pre-determined formula. So, though he wasn’t very successful at
anything, he got along all right, sliding almost decorously down
grooves which had nothing ringing about them. Unless urged, he never
mentioned his wound, his decoration, or the fact that he had “rolled
up” on August 4th. The modest well-bred, et cetera, English gentleman.

The formula for the death of a married mistress’s son was stern
heroism, and gentle consolation to the wounded mother heart. Mrs.
Winterbourne played up at first—it was the sort of thing that the
sheik always did with his passionate but tender love. But the effect of
George’s death on her temperament was, strangely enough, almost wholly
erotic. The war did that to lots of women. All the dying and wounds and
mud and bloodiness—at a safe distance—gave them a great kick, and
excited them to an almost unbearable pitch of amorousness. Of course,
in that eternity of 1914-18 they must have come to feel that men alone
were mortal, and they immortals; wherefore they tried to behave like
houris with all available sheiks—hence the lure of “war work” with
its unbounded opportunities. And then there was the deep primitive
physiological instinct—men to kill and be killed; women to produce
more men to continue the process. (This, however, was often frustrated
by the march of Science, viz., anticonceptives; for which, much thanks.)

So you must not be surprised if Mrs. Winterbourne’s emotion at the
death of George almost immediately took an erotic form. She was lying
on her bed in an ample pair of white drawers with very long ruffles and
a remarkably florid, if chaste, chemise. And the sheik, strong, silent,
restrained, tender, was dabbing her forehead and nose with Eau de
Cologne, while she took large sips of brandy at increasingly frequent
intervals. It was, of course, proper and even pleasant to have her
grief so much respected; but she did wish Sam hadn’t to be poked always
into taking the initiative. Couldn’t the man see that tender nerves
like hers needed to be soothed with a little Real Love _at once?_

“He was so much to me, Sam,” she said in low, indeed tremulous, tones,
subtly calculated, “I was only a child when he was born—a child _with_
a child people used to say—and we grew up together. I was so young
that I did not put up my hair until two years after he was born.” (Mrs.
Winterbourne’s propaganda about her perennial youth was so obvious
that it would hardly have deceived the readers of “John Blunt”—but
the sheiks all fell for it. God knows how young they thought she
was—probably imagined Winterbourne had “insulted” her when she was
ten.)

“We were always together, such pals, Sam, and he told me everything.”

(Poor old George! He had such a dislike for his mother that he hadn’t
seen her five times in the last five years of his life. And as for
telling her anything—why, the most noble of noble savages would
immediately have suspected _her_. She had let George down so badly time
after time when he was a boy that he was all tight inside, and couldn’t
give confidence to his wife or his mistresses or a man.)

“But now he’s gone,” and somehow Mrs. Winterbourne’s voice became so
erotically suggestive that even the obtuse sheik noticed it and was
vaguely troubled; “now he’s gone, I’ve nothing in the world but _you_,
Sam. You heard how that vile man insulted me on the telephone to-day.
Kiss me, Sam, and promise you’ll always be a pal, a _real_ pal.”

Active love-making was not in the sheik’s formula for that day;
consolation there was to be, but the “sacredness” of mother grief was
not to be profaned by sexual intercourse; although that too, oddly
enough, was “sacred” between a “clean” Englishman and a “pure” woman
who had only had one husband and twenty-two lovers. But what can the
Sam Brownes of the world do against the wills, especially the will
to copulate, of the Mrs. Winterbournes? He rose—if the expression
may be allowed—powerfully to the situation. He too found a certain
queer perverse satisfaction in honeying and making love over a nasty
corpse; while, if he had been capable of making the reflection, he
would have realized that Mrs. Winterbourne was not only a sadist, but a
necrophilous one.
